en/index.md, before:

# NixOS Asia

> [!tip] Welcome to NixOS Asia
> NixOS Asia is a community[^1]{.text-xs} of [[nix]] and [[nixos]] users, promulgated initially from the Indian subcontinent. Talk to us on [Zulip](https://nixos.zulipchat.com/)!


## Explore this website

<!--

NOTE to editors:

Here, you must establish `[[..]]#` style folgezettel links which will shape our
sidebar navigation.

-->

> [!info] WIP
> We are currently in the process of  building this website.

- Start from [[install|here]] if you are new to Nix. 
- We have [[tutorial]]# and a [[blog]]#
- Topical entry points: [[topics]]#
- You can browse the rest of the content  in [the index](-/all).

## Community

You can participate in the community discussion through the following venues. Zulip is the primary venue for discussion.

- [Zulip](https://nixos.zulipchat.com/): Zulip is a hybrid of "chat" and "forum".
    - Public chat logs are available at [chat.nixos.asia](https://chat.nixos.asia/)
- [Matrix](https://matrix.to/#/#nixos-asia:matrix.org)
- [Twitter / X](https://twitter.com/nixos_asia): We'll post all announcements here.
- [GitHub](https://github.com/nixos-asia)

Also consider taking a look at our sister community, [Functional Programming India](https://functionalprogramming.in/).

## Events

See [[event]].

:::{.text-xs}
---

\[^1\]: We are emphatically unaffiliated with the NixOS Foundation or their core community.
:::

Commit message:

add unofficial discord; drop matrix

en/index.md, after:

# NixOS Asia

> [!tip] Welcome to NixOS Asia
> NixOS Asia is a community[^1]{.text-xs} of [[nix]] and [[nixos]] users, promulgated initially from the Indian subcontinent. Talk to us on [Zulip](https://nixos.zulipchat.com/)!


## Explore this website

<!--

NOTE to editors:

Here, you must establish `[[..]]#` style folgezettel links which will shape our
sidebar navigation.

-->

> [!info] WIP
> We are currently in the process of  building this website.

- Start from [[install|here]] if you are new to Nix. 
- We have [[tutorial]]# and a [[blog]]#
- Topical entry points: [[topics]]#
- You can browse the rest of the content  in [the index](-/all).

## Community

You can participate in the community discussion through the following venues. Zulip is the primary venue for discussion.

- [Zulip](https://nixos.zulipchat.com/): Zulip is a hybrid of "chat" and "forum".
    - Public chat logs are available at [chat.nixos.asia](https://chat.nixos.asia/)
- [Twitter / X](https://twitter.com/nixos_asia): We'll post all announcements here.
- [GitHub](https://github.com/nixos-asia)

Other venues:

- [Discord](https://discord.gg/PMHqryBmQU): We recommend this unofficial Discord, if Discord is your preferred way of communication online.

Also consider taking a look at our sister community, [Functional Programming India](https://functionalprogramming.in/).

## Events

See [[event]].

:::{.text-xs}
---

\[^1\]: We are emphatically unaffiliated with the NixOS Foundation or their core community.
:::
